What are the different states of a thread in Java?
A thread in Java can be in one of the following states:
New - When a thread is created but not yet started.
Runnable - When a thread is ready to run and is waiting for the CPU.
Blocked - When a thread is blocked and waiting for a resource (like I/O or a lock).
Waiting - When a thread is waiting for another thread to perform a particular action.
Timed Waiting - When a thread is waiting for a specific period before performing an action.
Terminated - When a thread has completed its execution or has been interrupted.

What is the lifecycle of a thread in Java?
The lifecycle of a thread in Java includes the following stages:
1. New - The thread is created but not started.
2. Runnable - The thread is ready to run.
3. Blocked - The thread is waiting for a resource.
4. Waiting - The thread is waiting for another thread to do something.
5. Timed Waiting - The thread is waiting for a period of time.
6. Terminated - The thread has completed its execution.

How do you start a thread in Java?
A thread is started using the start() method. Once started, the thread will move to the Runnable state.
            

What is the difference between sleep() and wait() in thread lifecycle?
- sleep(): Makes the current thread sleep for a specified amount of time. The thread remains in the Timed Waiting state.
- wait(): Makes the current thread wait for a condition to be met (such as receiving a signal from another thread). The thread enters the Waiting state.
Thread.sleep(1000); // Sleep for 1 second, the thread goes to Timed Waiting
            

What happens when a thread reaches the terminated state?
A thread reaches the terminated state when it finishes executing its run() method or when it is forcefully terminated (e.g., by calling interrupt()). After the thread reaches the terminated state, it cannot be started again.

What is the use of interrupt() method in thread lifecycle?
The interrupt() method is used to interrupt a thread. When a thread is interrupted, it can throw an InterruptedException or set its interrupted flag to true.
            
How can a thread move from Runnable to Blocked state?
A thread moves from Runnable to Blocked when it is waiting to acquire a lock (for example, during synchronized method calls). It will stay in the Blocked state until it acquires the lock.
synchronized (lock) {
    // Thread will be blocked if another thread is holding the lock
}
            

Can a thread move directly from Runnable to Terminated state?
Yes, a thread can move directly from the Runnable state to the Terminated state if its run() method completes its execution or if it is interrupted.

What is the significance of Thread.join()?
The join() method allows one thread to wait for another thread to finish its execution before it continues. The calling thread will be in the Waiting state until the thread being joined terminates.
 

Thread States & Lifecycle - Q&A Set 2
What is the initial state of a thread when created?
When a thread is created but not yet started, it is in the New state. It remains in this state until the start() method is invoked.
            

What are the different methods used to transition a thread between states?
The following methods are used to transition a thread between states:
- start() - Transitions the thread from New to Runnable.
- sleep() - Moves the thread from Runnable to Timed Waiting.
- wait() - Moves the thread to Waiting.
- notify(), notifyAll() - Moves a thread from Waiting to Runnable.
- join() - Makes the current thread wait for the specified thread to terminate, moving it to Waiting.

What does the Runnable state mean in a thread's lifecycle?
In the Runnable state, a thread is ready to run and can be scheduled by the operating system. However, the thread may not be running immediately as it might be waiting for CPU time.

How does a thread enter the Blocked state?
A thread enters the Blocked state when it is waiting for a resource that is currently being used by another thread. It will remain in the Blocked state until it can acquire the resource.

What happens when a thread is in the Timed Waiting state?
A thread in the Timed Waiting state is waiting for a specified amount of time before it proceeds. The thread will return to the Runnable state once the time has elapsed.
            

What causes a thread to transition from Waiting to Runnable?
A thread in the Waiting state can transition to the Runnable state when another thread notifies it by calling notify() or notifyAll().

Can a thread be restarted after it has finished executing?
No, once a thread has finished executing and reached the Terminated state, it cannot be restarted. A new thread must be created if you wish to execute the code again.

What is the role of the Thread.sleep() method in a thread’s lifecycle?
The Thread.sleep() method pauses the execution of the current thread for a specified amount of time, which places the thread in the Timed Waiting state.

How does a thread move to the Terminated state?
A thread reaches the Terminated state when its run() method completes or when it is terminated by an external interruption.

What is the difference between sleep() and wait() in Java?
- sleep(): Causes the current thread to pause for a specified time, releasing the CPU but not the lock.
- wait(): Causes the current thread to release the lock and enter the Waiting state, waiting for another thread to call notify() or notifyAll().

What is the effect of calling Thread.interrupt() on a thread?
Calling interrupt() on a thread sets the interrupt flag for that thread. If the thread is in a blocking operation like sleep() or wait(), it will throw an InterruptedException and transition to the Runnable state.

What happens when a thread is in the Terminated state?
When a thread is in the Terminated state, it has completed its execution. It cannot be restarted, and any attempt to call start() on that thread will result in an IllegalThreadStateException.

What is the role of the yield() method in thread management?
The yield() method suggests to the thread scheduler that the current thread is willing to yield its current use of the CPU to other threads of the same priority. It doesn’t guarantee that the thread will stop immediately, but it gives the scheduler a chance to execute other threads.
Thread.yield(); // Suggests the thread to yield CPU time
            

Can a thread be in both Runnable and Blocked states simultaneously?
No, a thread cannot be in both Runnable and Blocked states at the same time. If a thread is blocked waiting for a resource, it cannot be scheduled to run until the resource is available.

What is the difference between notify() and notifyAll()?
- notify(): Wakes up one thread that is waiting on the object's monitor.
- notifyAll(): Wakes up all threads that are waiting on the object's monitor.

How does the Thread class handle synchronization?
The Thread class can handle synchronization using the synchronized block, which allows only one thread at a time to execute a block of code that is synchronized on an object.

What is a Daemon thread?
A Daemon thread is a thread that runs in the background, providing services to user threads. It does not prevent the JVM from exiting when all user threads have finished. It can be marked as a daemon thread by calling Thread.setDaemon(true).
            

What does the Thread.join() method do?
The join() method causes the current thread to wait until the thread on which it was called has finished executing. It allows one thread to wait for another thread to finish before proceeding.
            

How do you monitor the state of a thread?
You can monitor the state of a thread by calling Thread.getState(), which returns the current state of the thread, such as NEW, RUNNABLE, WAITING, etc.

What is the difference between Thread.sleep() and Object.wait()?
- Thread.sleep() pauses the execution of the current thread for a specified period, but it does not release any locks.
- Object.wait() releases the lock and causes the thread to enter the Waiting state until it is notified.

When does a thread enter the Timed Waiting state?
A thread enters the Timed Waiting state when it is waiting for a specific period of time to elapse, using methods like Thread.sleep(), Thread.join() with a timeout, or Object.wait() with a timeout.
            

How does Thread.interrupt() affect a thread in sleep() or wait()?
When a thread is sleeping or waiting, calling interrupt() will cause it to throw an InterruptedException and exit the sleeping or waiting state.
            

What is the NEW state of a thread?
The NEW state indicates that the thread has been created but not yet started. The thread is not eligible for scheduling until start() is called.
            

What happens when a thread is in the WAITING state?
A thread in the WAITING state is waiting indefinitely for another thread to notify it using notify() or notifyAll(), or for a specific condition to occur.

What is the BLOCKED state?
A thread is in the BLOCKED state when it is trying to acquire a lock but is unable to because another thread holds the lock.

How do you handle a Deadlock situation in Java?
A Deadlock occurs when two or more threads are blocked forever, waiting for each other to release a lock. To prevent deadlock, ensure that all threads acquire locks in the same order, and use timeouts or tryLock() methods where appropriate.

What is the RUNNABLE state?
A thread is in the RUNNABLE state when it is eligible for running but may not be running at the moment. The thread scheduler decides when it will be executed.

What is a Daemon thread, and how is it different from a normal thread?
A Daemon thread runs in the background and does not prevent the JVM from exiting when all user threads have finished. It can be created using setDaemon(true) on a thread.

What is the difference between Thread.join() and Thread.sleep()?
- Thread.join() allows the current thread to wait for the completion of the thread on which it was called.
- Thread.sleep() causes the current thread to pause for a specified amount of time.

How can you prevent a thread from executing in Java?
You can prevent a thread from executing by calling interrupt() to interrupt its execution, or using a condition within the thread to stop it.

What is the terminated state in thread lifecycle?
The terminated state indicates that the thread has finished its execution, either successfully or due to an exception, and cannot be restarted.

How do you make a thread wait for another thread to complete?
You can use the Thread.join() method to make one thread wait for another to complete.

What is the waiting state in Java threads?
A thread enters the waiting state when it is waiting indefinitely for another thread to notify it using notify() or notifyAll().

How can you check the state of a thread in Java?
You can check the state of a thread using the getState() method of the Thread class.

What is the Runnable state in Java threads?
The Runnable state refers to a thread that is eligible to run but is not necessarily executing at the moment. The thread is ready to run when the CPU is available.

What is the Daemon thread lifecycle?
A Daemon thread is a special kind of thread that runs in the background and is not required to keep the JVM running. When all user threads finish, the JVM terminates the daemon threads as well.

Can a thread be in multiple states simultaneously?
No, a thread can only be in one state at a time during its lifecycle. However, it can transition between different states, such as from RUNNABLE to WAITING, and from WAITING to TERMINATED.
            
Thread States & Lifecycle - Q&A Set 6
What is the NEW state in thread lifecycle?
The NEW state is the initial state of a thread before the start() method is invoked. In this state, the thread is not yet alive.

What does it mean when a thread is in the BLOCKED state?
A thread enters the BLOCKED state when it is waiting to acquire a lock in order to enter a synchronized block or method. It remains blocked until the lock becomes available.

How can you use Thread.interrupt() to stop a thread?
The Thread.interrupt() method is used to interrupt a thread that is currently executing. If the thread is sleeping or waiting, it will throw an InterruptedException.

What is the significance of the Thread.yield() method?
Thread.yield() is used to hint to the thread scheduler that the current thread is willing to yield its current use of the CPU, allowing other threads to run. However, its behavior is not guaranteed.

Can a thread go from the RUNNABLE state to the WAITING state?
Yes, a thread can transition from the RUNNABLE state to the WAITING state if it is waiting for some condition to be met, such as waiting for a lock or waiting for another thread to notify it.

What happens when you invoke Thread.start() more than once on the same thread?
Invoking Thread.start() more than once on the same thread will throw an IllegalThreadStateException because a thread can only be started once.

How does a ThreadPoolExecutor affect thread states?
A ThreadPoolExecutor manages a pool of worker threads that execute submitted tasks. The threads in the pool go through the usual lifecycle states but are reused to execute other tasks.

How can you create a thread and make it run in parallel with other threads?
You can create multiple threads and call their start() method to run them in parallel.

What is the difference between Thread.sleep() and Object.wait()?
Thread.sleep() is used to pause the execution of the current thread for a specific period of time. Object.wait() is used to make the current thread wait until another thread notifies it.
            
What happens when a thread enters the TIMED_WAITING state?
A thread enters the TIMED_WAITING state when it is waiting for a specified amount of time to pass, such as when calling Thread.sleep(), Object.wait(), or Thread.join() with a timeout.

What is the WAITING state in thread lifecycle?
The WAITING state occurs when a thread is waiting indefinitely for another thread to perform a particular action, such as calling Object.wait(), Thread.join(), or Lock.lock().

What is the TERMINATED state in thread lifecycle?
A thread enters the TERMINATED state when it has completed its execution or when it has been terminated due to an exception or being explicitly interrupted.

How can you make a thread wait indefinitely for another thread?
To make a thread wait indefinitely, you can use the Object.wait() method without a timeout, or Thread.join() without specifying a time.

Can you explain the lifecycle of a thread in detail?
The thread lifecycle consists of the following states: NEW, RUNNABLE, BLOCKED, WAITING, TIMED_WAITING, and TERMINATED. A thread begins in the NEW state, enters RUNNABLE when the start() method is invoked, may transition through other states based on its activities, and eventually reaches the TERMINATED state.

What is the difference between wait() and notify()?
The wait() method makes the current thread release the lock and enter the waiting state. The notify() method wakes up one thread that is waiting on the object's monitor.

What happens when you call Thread.interrupt() on a thread that is not blocked?
Calling Thread.interrupt() on a thread that is not blocked does not have an immediate effect. However, it will set the thread's interrupt flag, which can be checked using Thread.interrupted().

What does Thread.isAlive() method do?
The Thread.isAlive() method checks whether a thread is still alive (i.e., it has been started and has not yet completed or been terminated).

What is the BLOCKED state in thread lifecycle?
A thread enters the BLOCKED state when it is trying to acquire a lock that another thread is currently holding. Once the lock becomes available, the thread moves back to the RUNNABLE state.

How do you force a thread to terminate?
There is no direct method to forcefully terminate a thread in Java. The recommended way is to use the interrupt() method, which sets the interrupt flag. The thread should then check the flag periodically and exit gracefully.

What happens if you call Thread.sleep(0)?
Calling Thread.sleep(0) causes the current thread to yield its execution time slice and allows other threads to execute, without any actual delay.

How do you get the current state of a thread?
You can use the Thread.getState() method to get the current state of a thread.

What is the Thread.daemon property and how does it work?
A thread marked as a daemon thread runs in the background and does not prevent the JVM from exiting once all non-daemon threads have completed. You can set a thread as a daemon using Thread.setDaemon(true).

What is the purpose of Thread.yield()?
The Thread.yield() method causes the current thread to yield its remaining time slice and allows other threads of the same priority to execute. It does not guarantee immediate execution of other threads.

What is the difference between Thread.sleep() and Thread.wait()?
Thread.sleep() is a static method that pauses the current thread for a specific amount of time. On the other hand, Thread.wait() is used within synchronized blocks to make the current thread release the monitor and wait until another thread notifies it.

What is the Thread.interrupted() method used for?
The Thread.interrupted() method checks if the current thread has been interrupted and also clears the interrupt status flag.
            
How do you handle a thread that is in the WAITING state?
A thread in the WAITING state can only be woken up by another thread calling notify() or notifyAll() on the object it is waiting on, assuming proper synchronization is in place.

What happens if you call Thread.join()?
The join() method allows one thread to wait for the completion of another thread. The calling thread will be blocked until the target thread finishes its execution.

What is the RUNNABLE state in thread lifecycle?
A thread enters the RUNNABLE state when it is ready to run and the scheduler has assigned it a CPU time slice. It may still be waiting to be picked by the CPU if there are other threads competing for resources.
            
What is the effect of Thread.interrupt()?
Calling Thread.interrupt() sets the interrupt flag of the thread, which is used to notify that the thread should stop its work. The thread must regularly check for this interrupt signal and exit appropriately.

What is the TERMINATED state?
The TERMINATED state is the final state of a thread, indicating that it has completed execution and is no longer running. A thread can never be moved back to any other state once it is terminated.
            
What is the WAITING state?
A thread enters the WAITING state when it is waiting indefinitely for another thread to perform a specific action, such as notifying or interrupting it.

How do you create a thread with a custom ThreadFactory?
A custom ThreadFactory allows you to customize thread creation. You can define how threads are named, whether they are daemon threads, and other properties.
            
What is the role of Thread.sleep()?
The Thread.sleep() method is used to pause the current thread for a specified amount of time. This can be useful for controlling the execution flow or introducing delays in programs.
            
How do you check if a thread is alive?
You can use the isAlive() method to check if a thread is still executing. This returns true if the thread is alive and false otherwise.
            
What is a thread pool and how does it improve performance?
A thread pool manages a set of worker threads for performing tasks. Instead of creating a new thread for each task, threads are reused, which improves performance by avoiding overhead of thread creation and destruction.
            
What is a daemon thread?
A daemon thread is a background thread that does not prevent the JVM from exiting. It runs in the background and is automatically terminated when all non-daemon threads finish their execution.

What is the NEW state in thread lifecycle?
A thread is in the NEW state when it is created but has not yet started. It will enter the RUNNABLE state when the start() method is called.
            
What is the BLOCKED state?
A thread enters the BLOCKED state when it is waiting to acquire a lock in a synchronized block or method. This state occurs when another thread holds the lock the current thread needs.

How do you forcefully stop a thread?
It is not recommended to forcefully stop a thread using Thread.stop() as it can leave resources in an inconsistent state. Instead, use the interrupt mechanism or check for interrupt flags.

What is Thread.yield() used for?
The yield() method is a hint to the thread scheduler that the current thread is willing to yield its current CPU time slice so that other threads of the same priority can execute.

What happens when you call Thread.sleep(0)?
Calling Thread.sleep(0) effectively causes the current thread to yield its CPU time slice, similar to Thread.yield(), allowing other threads to execute.

How do you check if a thread is interrupted?
You can use the isInterrupted() method to check if a thread has been interrupted. This method does not clear the interrupt flag, meaning the interrupt flag remains set.
            
What is the WAITING state, and how does it differ from TIMED_WAITING?
The WAITING state occurs when a thread is waiting indefinitely for another thread to perform an action, while TIMED_WAITING occurs when a thread is waiting for a specified amount of time before proceeding.

What is the effect of Thread.interrupted()?
The Thread.interrupted() method checks and clears the interrupt flag of the current thread. It returns true if the thread has been interrupted, otherwise false.

What is the difference between Thread.start() and Thread.run()?
The Thread.start() method initiates the thread and calls the run() method in a new call stack. The run() method, when invoked directly, does not create a new thread but runs on the current thread.

// Calling run() directly:
thread.run(); // Does not create a new thread, executes in the current thread
            
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 